Tax revenues are crucial for financing public policies and reducing inequality. For instance, taxation reinforces accountability between citizens and rulers, making governments more responsive to the wider public (Prichard, 2015; Tilly, 2009). It also helps reduce income inequality (Mahon, 2012; Scheve & Stasavage, 2010) and finances public investments in education and health crucial for economic development (Bird, 2012; Rodrik, 2014).
However, tax reforms, particularly tax increases, tend to be politically unpopular. Reforms aimed at increasing revenue and efficiency have faced significant challenges due to public opposition to higher taxes. Even the best policies can fail in the absence of the right political conditions to make them amenable to the public and sustainable over time (Armijo & Faucher, 2002; Haggard & Kaufman, 1995; Haggard & Webb, 1994; Schneider, 2004). Recent literature has demonstrated the importance of public opinion in tax policy. Legislators face electoral disincentives to go against their constituents, and executives struggle to garner legislative majorities. Scholars have observed that tax reforms are closely related to legislative battles over the distributional consequences of policies (Ferranti, David, Ferreira, & Walton, 2004), and public attitudes play a significant role in determining the adoption of an additional tax burden, at least in a democracy (Fjeldstad, Schulz-Herzenberg, & Sjursen, 2012).
This research proposal aims to investigate how leaders can generate support for tax policies necessary to build stronger states and provide public revenue to citizens. Recent literature has pointed out that design features of tax reforms could help push through these reforms. Design features can ameliorate uncertainty about the fiscal exchange and reduce the significant animosity that taxation tends to produce. This paper focuses in particular on one of these policies—earmarking. Earmarking establishes a clear link between tax revenue and expenditures, making it mandatory for policymakers to allocate additional tax revenues to preset priorities (Bahiigwa, Frank, Odd-Helge, & Vegard, 2004). For instance, additional tax revenue could be tied to spending on public security, healthcare, or infrastructure. Earmarking tax revenue can shape taxpayers' perceptions that taxes will be used for their intended purpose. Earmarks are likely to ameliorate opposition among the public because they suggest that expenditures might align more closely with individuals' preferences (Buchanan, 1963; Fairfield, 2013).
An important source of uncertainty in the fiscal exchange relates to government officials' discretion in the policymaking process, which may threaten the future benefits envisioned by the population in exchange for today's taxes. Additionally, tax issues tend to be technical and complicated, resulting in a lack of investment in studying and being well-informed about them (Bartels, 2005). Therefore, I expect earmarking, by establishing a clear link between tax revenue and expenditures, to increase support for taxation due to individuals' self-interest concerns and a reduction in their perceived uncertainty about the outcome of their tax burden. This is particularly important given that citizens lack a clear understanding of the connection between tax burden and public policies funded through tax money (Bartels, 2005).
